[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today
I'd like to talk about mathematical expressions
and their connection with the natural number
Frameworks that we've been uh talking about
so this is a little bit of a subtle issue and
this video is probably going to raise as many
questions as answer them in particular I'm not
going to claim that I have a very satisfactory
view of how to effectively create a foundation for
arithmetical Expressions we will move somewhat in
this direction but there is much to be done
okay so we of course have a rough intuition
about natural numbers 0 1 2 3 but we've seen that
serious challenges arise once we start moving
beyond the familiar view the familiar range
and moving to bigger numbers and we've looked
at some s of alternative Frameworks that allow us
to be more solid about the actual nature of these
natural numbers so we have a view of trying to
actually Define these things and clearly specify
operations and you know have the possibility
of creating proofs for the arithmetical laws so
natural numbers primitive natural numbers were
regarded as multi sets of essential Strokes on
a page so The Strokes just some kind of Elemental
unit symbol representing some kind of fundamental
something so for example uh this thing here is
a primitive natural number it's a multi set of
these strokes and we also allowed ourselves
this more familiar Hindu Arabic notation or
shortcut symbol for representing this but we
really have this view now that this is actually
the gold plate object itself and this is just a
representation of it then we saw that we actually
wanted to go further and enlarge our view because
it's just hard to create really big numbers using
this framework so if we want to create bigger
numbers then we move to the Hindu Arabic numeral
system and that ultimately involved thinking of M
sets of Singletons Singletons being little lists
consisting of these natural numbers that we've
already defined so the Hindu Arabic numerals or
num rests on a prior Foundation of nat so for
example something like 321 officially now for
us this is really in the context of a vexel kind
of situation so here we have a Singleton zero a
couple of Singleton ones and three Singleton 2os
and effectively what these Singleton are doing
are representing powers of 10 so this Singleton
zero is effectively representing 10 the 0 this
thing here is representing 10 the 1 this is
representing 10 2 or 10^ S 100 okay but we can
actually work fundamentally just at the level of
these Singletons and then just interpret things
in terms of our Hindu Arabic numerals so this is
a powerful extension of our natural number system
but now we want to think about going a little
bit further and the reason for that is that both
natat and num have limits of applicability which
are naturally induced by the requirement that in
order to express one of these numbers we want to
be able to write it down completely and clearly
on a page or on a hard drive or whatever we're
talking about so we want to be able to specify
these things precisely and therefore there is
natural limits on how big we can express numbers
so in particular we've seen that very roughly
speaking the Primitive natural number numbers
are effectively Limited in some sense by the rough
size of the universe and so here is uh 10 to the
roughly 200 and it's written in the Hindu Arabic
system but we're not able to get at numbers that
are this big in the Primitive natural number
system so we can certainly write it down in
the Hindu Arabic system as I've done here very
explicitly and concretely but to write it down
in the uh natural number system is just too too
much work okay so there's some limits to both Nat
and in fact U to num as well and the Hindu Arabic
numerals are also limited but by something bigger
not 10 to the 200 but rather 10 to the 10 to
the 200 and the reason is that we've seen that
there's roughly 10 to the 200 plank cubes in the
universe so these sort of most Elemental kind of
building blocks that you could possibly imagine
in terms of writing something down in it and
in theory at least we could possibly perhaps you
know fill one of these plank cubes with a symbol
say a digit zero to 9 so there's 10 possibilities
for each plank Cube and if there's 10 to the 200
plank cubes then there's at most 10 to the 10 to
the 200 possible ways of filling out the universe
to create some Mega huge Hindu Arabic numeral so
this is some kind of limit on what we can do in
our universe but notice that in order to make this
statement I've had to use this expression here
which is not officially a Hindu Arabic numeral
okay if it was then it'd be contradictory because
I've just said we can't write down Hindu Arabic
numerals which are this big so this represents a
mathematical expression which represents some kind
of quantity which is beyond what we can do in the
Hindu Arabic numeral system so a natural question
is well what kind of a number is this is this a
legitimate kind of number what kind of arithmetic
can we build up with objects like this one of
the things that makes this challenging is that
there's actually quite a wide range of potential
arithmetical EX s that we might want to consider
for example we've seen just ordinary Powers we've
had a look at factorials we've had a look at
sort of these uh raising or lowering Powers 64
with a bar over it meaning 6 * 7 * 8 * 9 and 6 to
4 with a bar underneath it meaning 6 * 5 * 4 * 3
then there's towers of exponentials like this one
there's these higher operations hyper operations
like triangle or Square or some of the many higher
ones like Star five or Star n or Star n cubed Etc
but there's also then more mundane Expressions
things that are not quite so sophisticated and
huge as this but just more Elementary things
for example 5 + 3 that's also a mathematical
expression involving some numbers and operators or
16 * 387 or maybe something involving a summation
like summation I = 1 to 10 of i^2 which is usually
interpreted to mean the sum of the numbers 1 2 + 2
2 + 3 squ and so on all the way up to 10 s or more
fancy sort of combinations of various things like
57 - 2 cubed all of that in Brackets time 8 7
so there's a wide range of Elementary to very
sophisticated kinds of of things that we write
down which we generally treat as numbers but it's
really a question about you know what the nature
of these things really is what do we really mean
what what's the framework for doing arithmetic
with these kinds of things can we actually
concretely coherently uh create an arithmetical
framework that covers all of these things in
a consistent way it's a very big question
and underlying this discussion is this very
interesting question about should a mathematical
expression for a number be considered the same as
that number this a very important question so for
example let's consider this very familiar equation
that none of us would object to that 5 + 3 = 8 now
if we think for a second what does it mean well
the usual interpretation is is that here there's
a an operation a binary operation of numbers and
what we're saying is that if we take these two
numbers and we apply this operation then the
result of that is eight so it's expressing this
arithmetical identity and well we can ask then
does that mean that the two expressions 5 + 3 and
8 are interchangeable so is this asserting that if
you do a certain operation then you get something
or is it asserting that this expression and this
expression are to be considered completely
interchangeable those are subtly two different
interpretations to what this equality sign really
is meaning so if we adopt the stronger position
that this thing is asserting that 5 + 3 and eight
are completely interchangeable so in other words
if the answer to this question is yes then then
we are in a little bit of a delicate position
with respect to a lot of mathematics education
because then a student say in grade two when
given a little test like this okay here's a test
I'm a grade two student I've just heard my parents
talking about this kind of stuff because they've
been watching wildberger videos and so I know that
hey 5+ 3 equal 8 it means that they're exactly the
same all right so now I go to my test and say well
here's 3 + 7 the teacher wants me to evaluate that
hey I know how to evaluate that I'll just write
3 + 7 because okay I know I could write 10 but
why do I need to go through that hassle because
3 + 7 is equal to 10 so this is just as good an
answer as 10 is and similarly 5 * 9 is just 5 *
9 arithmetic becomes very simple this way of
course we've seen this kind of of arithmetic
many a time haven't we because this is what
the realists I'm referring to that strange
mathematical cult that thrived in the 20th
century the realists did arithmetic very much
like this given two real numbers this is how
you add them this is how you multiply them in
general so we're certainly nervous okay about
having an arithmetic that really asserts the
complete equivalence between these two things
at some level yes they are similar or equal but
maybe we would like to you know refer this thing
here to being a a real true natural number and
this is just a mathematical expression that can
be evaluated to that natural number that seems
on the whole things to be a somewhat sort of
safer uh position to have what do you think so
our orientation is going to be that we're going
to want to regard mathematical Expressions as
objects which are separate formally from natural
numbers or numerals but which evaluate to them at
least most of the time or much of the time so
for example here are some possible approaches
to introducing some kind of framework for
mathematical expressions right so this is not a
proper setup this is just a possible direction to
go that we might want to go in this direction so
one approach to something say that we might call
Nat expression okay is to consider something like
4 cubed and we can regard this as a a shortcut
for considering this primitive natural number
all right so 4 cubed is 4 * 4 * 4 that's 64 and
there are 64 little strokes here right so this
is the Primitive natural number that in Hindu
Arabic form we would say is 64 so what we could
do is enlarge our names for this thing so to allow
not just 64 written as 64 in Hindu Arabic but to
also allow this more fancy sophisticated kind of
expression so we can think of 4 cubed as being a
shortcut notation which ultimately represents
that natural number so that is one possible
approach and we don't have to restrict ourselves
to very simple things like this we could look at
combinations we could say 3 4 + 2 * 5 well that's
just a shortcut a mathematical expression that
actually evaluates to this primitive natural
number so here is the the true object and this
is now a other name for that object so we're kind
of enlarging the possible names that we can give
to our primitive natural numbers so this is one
approach I'm not saying that we're going to do
it this way but this is one way of thinking and
then we could do the same kind of thing but go
up one level to the Hindu Arabic numerals and we
could talk about say num expression where we're
now allowing bigger expressions like maybe 10^
32 + 491 this then could be a shortcut for this
Hindu Arabic numeral so instead of writing this
Hindu Arabic numeral out we could write this thing
here and say yes this is a suitable replacement
or name for this thing here and there would be
some difference between these things because
the range of natural numbers is more limited
than the range of Hindu Arabic numerals so we can
expect the Expressions that are involved here to
be generally possibly bigger more complicated than
the ones involved here so this is one possibility
to try to regard these mathematical Expressions
as simply alternate forms for either primitive
natural numbers or Hindu Arabic numerals so it's
a an an addition to our language that just makes
um makes it easier and more flexible to specify
largish uh natural numbers or numerals that's
one possibility okay but what about our favorite
big number Zed which is 10 triangle 10 + 23 10
triangle 10 being this familiar Tower of 10 10 all
top of each other 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the
10 so on plus 23 now this is an expression that we
can write down involving the exponentiation repeat
it a few times but what kind of a natural number
is this how does this fit into the framework that
we've just outlined well the reality is that it
doesn't fit into that framework okay it just does
not because it's too big this is certainly not
a primitive natural number there's no way that
this is a shortcut for a actual primitive natural
number which is a whole bunch of Strokes on a page
no way and it's also not anything representing a
Hindu Arabic numeral there's no way of writing out
a Hindu Arabic numeral with lots of zeros and
then ending in 2 three that actually is being
represented by this this is just way too big
so this thing whatever it is is something that
really is going Beyond Nat and Beyond num so the
unfortunate reality is that if we're trying to set
up a type say num expression which is actually
independent of natural numbers and numerals in
other words which aspires to describing objects
which cannot be described as primitive natural
numbers or as Hindu Arabic numerals then we
are involved in serious logic Strife we have
serious challenges ahead of us which are not at
all obvious how to overcome so in particular we
have to deal with at least the following kinds of
issues we have to specify what are the underlying
objects okay so if the underlying objects are
certain kinds of mathematical Expressions then you
have to say very clearly what kind of Expressions
you're going to allow and which ones you're not
going to allow clearly that's all already very
challenging then you have to Define equality right
so you have some complicated expression involving
all kinds of possible symbols and then over here
there's another one and natural question is how
do you decide when these two things are equal so
it's a crucial aspect of effective arithmetic that
you are able to effectively decide when two things
are equal and we know that with primitive natural
numbers we can do this we can match up the Strokes
in one expression with The Strokes in the other
and even though it may take us a while we can
systematically go through them and see if they're
actually the same size or not and with Hindu
Arabic numerals it's also straightforward you
just compare digits one by one with mathematical
Expressions this is so much more complicated
and then how do we Define the arithmetical
operations very very very very big can of worms
here how do we actually Define addition of
mathematical expressions or multiplication
or exponentiation or factorial or anything
else that we're wanting to be interested in so
we can get a sense that there's very serious
problems here because even our computers run
into difficulties at this level if you explore
with your computer system whatever you have
you just start exploring arithmetic with very
big numbers and you will quickly see that your
computer is very capable up to a certain point
and then it doesn't take too much to be able to
write down huge expressions like 10 triangle 10
plus 23 and get your computer to do something with
that and it completely bulks you know just beyond
the capability of your computer it's not because
computer scientists have not thought a lot about
this they have thought very much about this kind
of thing but it's just that the difficulties are
so big so as an example let's have a look at some
sort of midlevel Expressions here you roughly
around the range of Zed not as big as Zed prime
or 3 star n^ 2 4 or any of those other humongous
things that we had just relatively mundane things
like 8 to the 8 to the 9 to the 7 to the 3 to the
5 to the 11 to the 10 plus this thing plus this
combination all right so let's think about that
expression so a first natural question might be
well there's some arithmetic involved here okay is
this kind of the final expression or ought we just
sort of simplify things right it's the same kind
of question as 5 + 3 if you're given 5 + 3 are you
allowed to leave that in that form or you obliged
to simplify things so usually with primitive
natural numbers or Hindu Arabic numerals you
are obliged and you are able to simplify at least
simple additions I give you 437 plus 149 you can
simplify that you can actually evaluate that thing
and come up with another Hindu Arabic numeral
uh in this situation here we are very much more
like in the realm of our real number Enthusiast
friends yeah where you look at this and you sort
of shrug your shoulders and say I don't know um it
is what it is that's all I can say about it okay
and here's another such expression involving some
other Tower plus some other Tower plus some other
combination of of towers okay so you can see that
even doing arithmetic at this level is essentially
vacuous for example if I asked you you know what
is the sum of this thing and this thing you all
you can really do is just write down you know copy
this thing put a plus sign and copy this thing
it's essentially vacuous right it's exactly the
way real number enthusiasts do their arithmetic
in fact the only kind of question that you really
have a chance at at addressing really is a much
more Elementary kind of question the question of
which of these two things is bigger so how are
you going to decide that it's a very Elementary
question this number this number which of them is
bigger now because I more or less just wrote them
down I can pretty well guarantee you that they are
not equal I don't know that absolutely for sure
but I'm willing to bet my bottom dollar that they
are not equal and I'm also willing to bet that one
of these is vly bigger than the other okay on any
kind of reasonable scale one is just humongously
bigger than the other one but which one it is um
I'd have to think about that to get a guess and if
I actually had to you know give a good argument
for like a proof as to which one is bigger that
might not be so easy to do so I challenge you
right see can you figure out staring at these two
things which of them is bigger more generally can
you prescribe some relatively routine algorithm or
procedure that given to largest expressions like
this will evaluate which one is bigger so we see
that arithmetic with this kind of mathematical
expression is actually far from being easy okay
so we write down things like this and we have
a sort of of what we're talking about but that
sense actually is not really supported very
clearly by anything at all other than a rough
intuition all right so currently our aim to build
a coherent system of arithmetical Expressions is
uh not very far off the ground okay to be honest
so it's really just a vague in precise notion at
this point supported by well some examples that we
can write down and a sort of naive sense of bigger
and smaller and really to be honest essentially
vacuous kind of arithmetic right um now yeah in
other words it's a lot like the modern theory
of real numbers okay so there's a big to-do
here which is to give a coherent account of
num Expressions that really goes beyond our
Hindu Arabic numerals okay and that really says
precisely what the object are says precisely
what the operations are and gives us proofs of
the laws of arithmetic very very big challenge
now even though we don't have such a thing that
doesn't mean that we can't still work with these
expressions in fact we've been doing a lot of work
with these Expressions because all that discussion
of hyper operations that we had with those star
NS and star n squares and that uh that successor
limit hierarchy that was very interesting that's
really at this sort of stratospheric level we
really don't know what we're talking about here
in terms of actually the underlying objects so we
now address more clearly the the fact that I've
hinted at number of times that our underlying
natural number system is just not extensive
enough to fully support the Expressions that
I've been writing down in that hyper operations
successor limit hierarchy we've been writing down
these numbers like 3 star n^2 4 writing them down
and kind of assuming that there were numbers out
there that these Expressions captured but this is
all now very much in doubt right I mean we have to
be honest and say we don't really have a theory
of natural numbers that extends that far to make
really legitimate sense of those things now that's
not to say that we can't do some partial things
okay we don't have to have a full-blown Theory we
can wait a few hundred years perhaps okay maybe
we'll have to do that but in the meantime we can
still ask questions and do some partial things as
long as we don't start pretending that we actually
have a full-blown Theory okay we do not want to do
like the real number theorists do is to pretend
that there's a solid Theory and just never talk
about the foundations and just go on pretending we
don't want to do that very clearly not but we can
ask still lots of interesting questions and we can
we can address aspects of arithmetic with these
big arithmetical expressions in particular we can
talk about divisibility that's a very interesting
topic that I want to start talking to you about
the moving towards understanding primes and more
generally just how we understand divisibility
even for maybe mathematical Expressions which
are beyond our usual arithmetic interesting
stuff which um nice way goes back to the ancient
Greeks too so I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening